# Intro to NODEJS

#### *A JS run time environment built on chrome v8 JS Engine*

1. Nodejs is a cross-platform (can run on every OS) and open-source maintained by openJS foundation.

2. NodeJS helps to run JS outside the web browser

3. NodeJS has an Event driven architecture and capable of Asynchronous I/O (Non-Blocking I/O)

4. NodeJS was developed by Ryan Dahl in 2009

## History of NodeJS

> Wherever there is JS there will be an JS Engine to execute it.

- `2009`: 
  
  - Ryan Dahl creates webJS and used SpiderMonkey (JS engine of Firefox) and After 2 days he shifted to Chrome V8. During the same time Company Joyent was doing the  same hence funded NodeJS project.
  - Later webJS was renamed to NodeJS
  - Before NodeJS Apache HTTP servers were used to create web servers which was Blocking Server

- `2010`: 
  
  - npm was create by Issac form Joyent

- `2011`
  
  - NodeJS introduced Windows Support by Joyent+Microsoft

- `2012`:
  
  - Ryan leaves the project and Issac took over. 
  - Departure of Ryan made the development of project slower and can't catch up to the new updates of  Chrome's V8 Engine

- `2014`:
  
  - A dev named Fedor created a fork of Nodes io.js
  - It was created due Joyent was restricting the release of new updates.

- `2015`: 
  
  - NodeJS and io.js got merged and a NodeJS Foundation was formed which shall maintain the NodeJS.

- `2019`:
  
  - NodeJS Foundation was merged with JS Foundation created the OpenJS Foundation and still maintains by it.
