# Navigation In Linux

## `pwd` : Print the name of the current working directory.

```bash
pwd    
```

## `ls`:  List directory contents

```bash
ls [OPTION]... [FILE]... 

Note : If File Path is not provided default will be 
Current Working Directory
```

- `-a` : Also Consider hidden files in the list

- `-s` : Includes the size of the file as well

- `-l` :  use a long listing format

- `-h`:  prints list in human redable form with -l and -s, print sizes like 1K 234M etc

- `--group-directories-first` group directories before files

- ` --hyperlink[=WHEN]` : hyperlink  file  names;  WHEN  can  be 'always' (default if omitted), 'auto', or 'never'

### Sorting the List

- `-S`:   Sorts the the List In Size from Largest to Smallest

- `-t`:   sort by time, newest first

- `-U`:  do not sort, list entries in directory order

- `-X` :   sort alphabetically by entry extension

- `-r`:  reverse order while sorting

## `cd`: Change the shell working directory

```bash
cd [dir]
```

> **Absolute and Relative Paths**
> 
> An **absolute path** is the *full and complete address* of a file or folder, starting from the **root directory `/`**.
> 
> It is *independent of where you currently are* in the filesystem thus Very stable for scripts, services, and deployments.
> 
> A **relative path** is the address of a file *relative to your current directory*.  
> It depends on *where you are* at the moment.
> 
> > **Syntax of Relative Path**
> > 
> > | Symbol | Meaning                      |
> > | ------ | ---------------------------- |
> > | `.`    | Current directory            |
> > | `..`   | Parent directory             |
> > | `./`   | Current directory (explicit) |
> 
> | Feature                          | Absolute Path  | Relative Path   |
> | -------------------------------- | -------------- | --------------- |
> | Starts with `/`                  | ✔ Yes          | ✘ No            |
> | Independent of current directory | ✔ Yes          | ✘ No            |
> | Shorter                          | ✘ Often longer | ✔ Often shorter |
> | Best for scripts/deployments     | ✔ Yes          | ✘ Risky         |
> | Best for quick navigation        | ✘ Not always   | ✔ Yes           |

> ### Use **Absolute Paths** when:
> 
> - writing **systemd services**
> 
> - configuring **Nginx / Apache**
> 
> - Docker volumes
> 
> - deployment automation 
>   
>   Because absolute paths avoid mistakes.
> 
> ### Use **Relative Paths** when:
> 
> - navigating around while working
> 
> - inside a project structure
> 
> - writing small scripts that run inside the repo
> 
> Because relative paths are convenient and shorter.
> 
> > To move *backwards* (to parent folders), you use:
> > 
> > `..`
> > 
> > This means:  
> > **“Go one folder up from where I am now.”**
> > 
> > And you can chain them:
> > 
> > ```bash
> > ../.. → go up 2 levels
> > 
> > ../../.. → go up 3 levels
> > ```

## `mkdir` - make directories

> `NOTE`
> 
>  Create the DIRECTORY(ies), if they do not already exist.

```bash
mkdir [OPTION]... DIRECTORY...
```

- `-v` : To get an Output messae after Creating the Directory

## `rmdir` - remove empty directories

Removes the mentioned directories if there are empty

```bash
rmdir [OPTION]... DIRECTORY...
```

- `-v` : To get an Output messae after deleting the Directory.

## Handling Files in Linux

Every file in Linux carries **metadata**—information *about* the file.

Part of that metadata is **timestamps**, which record *when* certain actions happened.

A file has **three main timestamps**:

### **1. mtime — Modified Time**

**When the file’s content was last changed.**

Example:  
If you edit `app.js`, save it, the mtime becomes “now”.

This is the most commonly used one.

---

### **2. atime — Access Time**

**When the file was last *read*.**

Example:  
If you open a file with `cat`, the atime gets updated.

---

### **3. ctime — Change Time**

**When file metadata changed.** 
This includes:

- permissions

- owner

- group

- hard links

- name changes

*Content change also updates ctime.*

> `TIP`
> 
> use the `stat` command to get the metadata of the file
> 
> ```bash
> stat [OPTION]... FILE... 
> ```

### `touch` : change file timestamps

```bash
touch [OPTION]... FILE...
```

Update  the access and modification times of each FILE to the current time.

**A FILE argument that does not exist is created empty**

> `NOTE`
> 
> - It does **not** open the file
> 
> - It does **not** edit content
> 
> - It does **not** add text
> 
> It only **creates or updates metadata**.

## Text Editors in Terminal

### `nano`

```bash
nano filename
```

Nano is a **terminal-based text editor**.  

You use it to *create, open, edit, and save* files directly from the command line.

It’s small, lightweight, and always available on servers.

> `NOTE`
> 
> If the file doesn’t exist, nano will create it for you.

Save with `Ctrl + O` , To exit  use `Ctrl + X` or 

`Ctrl + S` and `Enter` 

### `vim`

> Every DevOps engineer should know basic Vim , it’s always available, even when nano is not.

```bash
vim filename
```

Vim has many modes, but you only need two for now:

#### **1. Normal Mode** (Default mode)

- Move, Delete , Copy , Navigate ,Run commands

#### **2. Insert Mode**

Used to **type text**.

Press `i` to enter into Insert Mode

> Press `ESC` to go back to Normal Mode

#### Saving File in `vim`

**Save**- `:w`

**Quit**- `:q`

**Save + Quit**-`:wq`

**Force Quit (discard changes)** -  `:q!`

> `NOTE`
> 
> After Writing file in **Insert Mode** you need to exit it and then you can save the file in the **Normal Mode** using the above commands.

## File Positions

### `cp` : Copying Files and Folders

```bash
cp OPTIONS src destination
```

**Important Options**: 

| Option | Meaning                                                           |
| ------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `-r`   | Copy folders recursively (Copies files of the SubFolders as well) |
| `-v`   | Show what’s being copied (“verbose”)                              |
| `-i`   | Ask before overwriting                                            |
| `-p`   | Preserve timestamps/permissions                                   |

> `TIP`
> 
> To just copy files from source then use:
> 
> ```bash
> cp -rv srcc/* dest/
> ```

### `mv`: move and rename files

```bash
mv SRC DEST
```

- If **SRC and DEST are in the same directory** and DEST is a **new filename**, then `mv` performs a **rename**.
  
  - `mv old.txt new.txt` file got renamed to **new.txt**

- If Different moves the file to DEST Path.
  
  - `mv old.txt ./subFolder`  the old.txt is moved to the path specified

> use `-i` to ask before prompting :
> 
> - hit `y` enter to allow
> 
> - hit `n` enter to reject

## `rm` - remove files or directories

rm removes each specified file.  **By default, it does not remove directories.** (to remove empty directories use `rmdir`)

- To remove directories and thier content recursively

- `-i` promot before every removal.
  
  - > Best practice is using `-I`  it prompts once before removing more than three files, or  when  removing  recursively.
